Machine learning(ML)
================

In ML, algorithms analyze training data to identify meaningful patterns and relationships. These learned patterns are then used to classify samples and make predictions for new, unseen data.

Predictor sources
-----------------

- NMR only
- Clinical only
- NMR + clinical
- PSA only

Models
------

- Logistic regression;
- Random forest;
- Linear support vector machine (SVM) using ``LinearSVC``;
- Artificial neural network (ANN)/Multilayer perceptron (MLP) using ``MLPClassifier``.

Holdout evaluation
------------------

Holdout evaluation assesses model performance on a separate subset of data that is not used for training. By default, 25% of the samples are reserved for testing, and the split is stratified when class sizes permit. The app reports training and test accuracy, balanced accuracy, classification reports, confusion matrices, and predictions for individual samples.

Cross-validation
----------------

Cross-validation provides a more robust estimate of model performance by repeatedly training and evaluating the model on different subsets of the data. Five-fold stratified cross-validation is enabled by default but can be disabled. The number of folds is reduced automatically when the smallest class contains fewer samples than the requested number of folds.

Leakage control
---------------

Median imputation, standardization, and optional PCA are inside the
scikit-learn ``Pipeline``. These transformations are fitted separately in each
training split or cross-validation fold.

Optional PCA
------------

PCA is off by default. When enabled, the metrics distinguish:

- input features before PCA;
- features seen by the classifier after PCA.

Probability and ROC outputs
---------------------------

Logistic regression, random forest, and ANN provide ``predict_proba`` and can
produce probability and ROC plots after a valid holdout fit.

The current linear SVM uses ``LinearSVC``. It does not provide calibrated
probabilities, so predicted-probability and ROC tables are not generated by
the current implementation.

Feature importance
------------------

- logistic regression and linear SVM: mean absolute coefficient;
- random forest: impurity-based feature importance;
- ANN: mean absolute first-layer weight, which is an approximate heuristic.

When optional PCA is used, the displayed feature-importance table is obtained
from a separate full-data model without PCA so original variables remain
visible. It must therefore be interpreted as an exploratory explanation, not
as a held-out performance estimate.

Model history
-------------

Each model run is appended to a session history table with settings and
metrics. Download the table before closing or restarting the app.
